Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients are macroecological patterns that define
how taxonomic, phylogenetic and functional diversity are spatially distributed on Earth. Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients have been
useful for conservation biology because they help to prioritize regions at a global scale. Understanding
how Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients are shaped is an important challenge, especially in the current context of biodiversity loss
and climate change. Traditionally, studies on Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients have observed that species richness increased from
polar to equatorial regions, but they are far from reaching a definitive understanding. A key
reason is that Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients have ignored the perceived indeterminacy of ecological interactions occurring at lower
levels of biological organization, thus limiting our capacity to
fully understand global patterns of diversity. The ACROSS project is intended to address this knowledge
gap in (macro)ecology.
A myriad of hypotheses exists for the Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients but climate has been considered the most important
mechanistic driver. The species-energy hypothesis postulates that species richness varies with
climate because the number of individuals an area can support increases with increasing energy availability
(greatest richness where it is warm and wet). However, the relative contributions of climate-species
correlations continue to be debated since the climate variation is insufficient to fully account for the
variation of species richness. Thus, there is a risk to infer the processes regulating local species
diversity only from Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients that focus on species richness, because macroecological patterns likely result
from individual-level processes, such as consumption, respiration or predator-prey dynamics.
Body size is a key trait that corelates with organism’s metabolic processes and can ultimately determine
population dynamics, community stability, and food-web structure. Moreover, body size responds to
macroecological patterns because increased temperature directly influences metabolic rates causing an
overall shrinking of individual body size following body-size–temperature rules. Given the key role
of body size in metabolic theory and bioenergetics, growing evidence suggests that the use of sizebased
approaches allow a better understanding of biodiversity patterns, but to date this
remains poorly implemented at global scales.
A universal negative relationship between individual body size and abundance has emerged as a
trait-based theory (here as size spectrum theory) for scaling from individual-level processes (respiration, consumption) to represent food webs and ecosystem properties (energy transfer; ecological status). The size spectrum theory is based upon the premise that the structure and
functioning of food webs are determined by the metabolic capacity of individuals, and that
metabolism is tightly linked to body size. Although recent studies investigated size spectra variations
at large spatial scales, yet there is no consensus in developing a mechanistic understanding of
the effects of climate on the size spectrum comprising multiple trophic levels and at different ecosystems.
In this context, one fundamental challenge is to determine the link between climate–species patterns and
size spectrum theory to reach an understanding on the response of community size structure to Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients. The novelty of the proposal lays on assessing global patterns of biodiversity from one of the lowest
biological level – the individuals – since the individuals-based processes leads to the emergence of global
scale patterns. In ecology, all patterns are results or by-products of individuals and interactions between
them but in macroecology, Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients most often do not refer directly to individuals. Due to the universality of
the scaling relationships between body size and metabolic processes across the animal kingdom,
the proposal fits perfectly for the generality of the call bringing together multiple trophic levels (from
invertebrates to fish) and ecosystem types (terrestrial, marine and freshwater). We will also (i) use a
suite of advanced statistical procedures to evaluate size spectrum variations, and (ii) create a unique group
of Early-Career-Researchers from field ecologists to modelers. Although challenging, we argue that the use of a meta-analytic
approach has the potential to bring new insights into research dedicated to Latitudinal Biodiversity Gradients and size spectra. This
requires extensive literature surveys (meta-analysis), team collaboration and advanced statistical
procedures that will allow us to fully embrace our goals, exchange ideas on cutting-edge research and to forge new synergies between female and male ECRs coming from different
geographical regions.
